Tool Setup
*********

.. note:: If you are planning to run a CAM program or create a conversational program, and have not already done so, skip directly to either conversational programming or loading a program before reading this section.

.. _toolsetup:

-----------------------
Square the tool post
-----------------------

.. caution:: Unlike the manual lathes you are familiar with, the X and Z hand wheels are not directly coupled to the movement of the carriage. Carriage movement is controlled by servo motors, this means there is no sense of feel when moving the carriage. For example, if you crash a tool into something using the hand wheels, you will feel no resistance. For this reason you must exercise a significant amount of care and attention when moving the machine manually. Crashing the machine will result in permanent revocation of CNC lathe privileges.

1. Check that the toolpost mounting fixture is ~2 inches from the end of the cross slide closest to you. If it requires adjusting please speak with shop staff.
2.  Loosen the nut on the top of the tool post using the provided box end wrench (do not use an adjustable wrench)
3. On the controller, press MODE and then DRO to activate the jog stick and hand wheels

.. note:: Now is a good time to familiarize yourself with the hand wheels and jog stick by carefully moving the carriage with them. You must completely understand which way the carriage will move when using the manual controls before continuing. The increment resolution of the hand wheels  can be set to either course or fine using the F/C button on the controller.

4. Use the jog stick to position the tool post so it is centered in front of the tailstock. ***ADD NOTE ABOUT HITTING LIMIT SWITCHES***
5. Unlock the tailstock and bring it close to the carriage.
6. Unlock the tailstock ram, then extend the tailstock ram until its face comes into contact with the side of the toolpost.
7. Ensuring the toolpost t-nut remains flush with the side of the toolpost mounting fixture closest to the chuck/spindle, align the toolpost so that it is parallel to the face of the tailstock ram.
8. Being careful to keep the the toolpost square to the tailstock face, tighten the nut on the top of the toolpost.
9. Return the tailstock to the end of the ways and then press MODE on the controller.

----------------
Prepare Tools
----------------

1. Identify the cutting tools and tool holders you will need to complete the part. At minimum you will need a live center to center your tool(s) and right hand turning tool to turn and face your stock prior to performing any further operations.
2. The tooling for the Trak lathe is located in the red tool cart next to the machine. Ask shop staff to assist you in selecting and setting up your tools.
3. Make note of the nose radius (if any) of the tools you select. You will need to know these later.

.. note:: CNC drilling (using a drill in a holder on the toolpost) is not allowed on this machine.

------------------
Center Tooling
------------------

1. Unlock the tailstock and bring it close to the carriage.
2. Insert a live center into the tailstock.
3. Insert a tool into the tool post so that the tip of the tool faces the tailstock.
4. On the controller, press MODE and the DRO to activate the jog stick and hand wheels.
5. Adjust the carriage and tailstock so that the tip of the tool can be easily aligned with the tip of the live center.
6. Loosen the locking nut on the tool holder.
7. Use the tool holder height adjustment knob to align the tip of tool with the tip of the live center.
8. Once aligned, tighten the locking nut on the tool holder.
9. Repeat this process for each tool.

.. note:: It is recommended that you order your tooling on top of the red tool cart in the order you intend to use them (i.e, left to right, tool 1, tool 2, etc.). This will help avoid mistaking similar looking tools with the correct one for the current operation.

---------------
Set tool table
---------------
note program should already be created at this point if being used in CNC mode (see note at top of page)

---------------------------------------
Set tool change reference position
---------------------------------------
